# Introduction
This document contains information for understanding the column variables generated by run_analysis.R.  Please refer to Readme.md for overall details of the project.

After running, the output file contains 86 colomn variables, representing the MEANs of each feature containing a MEAN or standard deviation (STDEV) value - sorted by Subject and the Activity Label.  

**The mathematical derivation for each of the features is described below.**

# Features

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals timeAccelerometer-XYZ and timeGyroscope-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (timeBodyAccelerometer-XYZ and timeGravityAccelerometer-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (timeBodyAccelerometerJerk-XYZ and timeBodyGyroscopeJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm ( timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitude,  timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitude,  timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude,  timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitude,  timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAccelerometer-XYZ, fBodyAccelerometerJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyroscope-XYZ, fBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude, fBodyGyroscopeMagnitude, fBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

 timeBodyAccelerometer-XYZ
 timeGravityAccelerometer-XYZ
 timeBodyAccelerometerJerk-XYZ
 timeBodyGyroscope-XYZ
 timeBodyGyroscopeJerk-XYZ
 timeBodyAccelerometerMagnitude
 timeGravityAccelerometerMagnitude
 timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude
 timeBodyGyroscopeMagnitude
 timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude
fBodyAccelerometer-XYZ
fBodyAccelerometerJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyroscope-XYZ
fBodyAccelerometerMagnitude
fBodyAccelerometerJerkMagnitude
fBodyGyroscopeMagnitude
fBodyGyroscopeJerkMagnitude

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

MEAN(): Mean value
STDEV(): Standard deviation
mad(): Median absolute deviation 
max(): Largest value in array
min(): Smallest value in array
sma(): Signal magnitude area
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values. 
iqr(): Interquartile range 
entropy(): Signal entropy
arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4
correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals
maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude
meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency
skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal 
kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal 
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.
angle(): Angle between to vectors.

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

gravityMean
timeBodyAccelerometerMean
timeBodyAccelerometerJerkMean
timeBodyGyroscopeMean
timeBodyGyroscopeJerkMean


